docs/xwmfs.asciidoc, before:

XWMFS(1)
========
:doctype: manpage


NAME
----
xwmfs - represents X11 window manager state in the file system


SYNOPSIS
--------
*xwmfs* ['OPTIONS'] 'MOUNTPOINT'


DESCRIPTION
-----------
An implementation of a userspace file system based on fuse that allows
interaction with an EWMH compliant X11 window manager via files.

Because the xwmfs acts as an X11 client on the X server it requires to have a
valid DISPLAY environment variable set and the authority to access the X11
display. Otherwise the xwmfs program will print an error and exit immediately.

To unmount the xwmfs file system the command `fusermount -u 'MOUNPOINT'` can
be used.

For information about the semantics of the file presented in the file system
see <<X1,*ENTRIES PER WINDOW*>> and <<X2,*ENTRIES FOR WINDOW MANAGER*>>.

OPTIONS
-------

*-f*::
	Run the file system in the foregrond. Otherwise the program will detach
	into the background.

*-d*::
	Enable additional low level debug output on stdout. This will trace
	every file system access and more.

*--logger*='EWID'::
	A bitmask for the logging output of the program. Each letter stands
	for error, warning, information and debug respectively. So a value of
	'1111' would enable all logging output to stdout. This logging
	consists of higher level information about what happens on X protocol
	and file system level. By default only errors and warnings are
	printed.

*--xsync*::
	Operates the X client library in synchronous mode. This allows better
	error detection if some X operation fails.

[[X1]]
ENTRIES PER WINDOW
------------------

The `windows` directory contains one directory entry per X window managed by
the window manager on the current DISPLAY. Some secondary windows like popup
windows are currently not handled by xwmfs. Each directory is named after the
unique decimal window ID of the represented X window. These directories may
contain the following files:

*id*::
	A regular, read-only file that again produces the unique, decimal
	window ID of the represented X window.

*name*::
	A regular, read-write file that produces the current window title on
	read, and changes the window title on write. Changes of this value are
	also reported via the `events` file.

*desktop*::
	A regular, read-write file that produces the desktop number a window
	is located on on read, and changes where the desktop a window is
	located on write. Changes of this value are also reported via the
	`events` file.

*pid*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces the PID of the program that
	owns the window.

*command*::
	A regular, read-write file that allows to issue commands for the
	window. On read the list of possible commands is returned. On write
	the appropriate command is executed. Currently this covers 'DELETE'
	and 'DESTROY' to force or ask the window to be closed.

*events*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces one event per line that
	affects the represented X window. The name of the event corresponds to
	the name of the file that is affected by the event. For example, if
	the name of the window changes than an event named 'name' is produced.
	To obtain the new value you need to read the file in question. If the
	window gets closed then the events file produces a 'destroyed' event
	and returns an EOF indication on further read attempts.

*mapped*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces a boolean value of 0 or 1
	indicating whether this window is currently mapped (visible). Changes
	of this value are also reported via the `events` file.

[[X2]]
ENTRIES FOR WINDOW MANAGER
--------------------------

The `wm` directory contains global state related to the window manager. The
directory may contain the following files:


*name*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces the name of the running window
	manager.

*class*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces the kind of window manager
	that is running. Not always available.

*active_desktop*::
	A regular, read-write file that produces the number of the currently
	shown desktop on read. Writing a new desktop number to this file
	causes the active desktop to be changed.

*number_of_desktops*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces the number of virtual desktops
	currently configured.

*show_desktop_mode*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces a boolean value of 0 or 1
	indicating whether the "show desktop mode" is active.

*pid*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces the PID of the window manager
	process.

*events*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces one event per line that
	affects the global window manager state. The name of the event
	corresponds to the name of the file that is affected by the event. For
	example if the number of desktops changed then an event
	'number_of_desktops' is produced.

NOTES
-----

Depending on the window manager in use some features may not be available or
may behave differently than with other window managers. This has nothing to do
with xwmfs.

Because of the asynchronous nature of the X protocol, intermediate states may
be seen in the file system. A window might disappear at any time, values of
properties may change quickly. Any scripts that operate on the file system
should be prepared to deal with such situations.

Any open files that correspond to X windows that have already been destroyed
will return an error code of 'ENXIO' for any attempted operations.

EXIT STATUS
-----------
*0*::
    Success

*1*::
    Failure (syntax or usage error; X error).

ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
---------------------

*DISPLAY*::
  The X Display to use

AUTHOR
------
xwmfs was written by Matthias Gerstner <matthias.gerstner@nefkom.net>.


RESOURCES
---------
GitHub: <https://github.com/gerstner-hub/xwmfs>

COPYING
-------
Copyright \(C) 2017 Matthias Gerstner. Free use of this software is
granted under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL).

Commit message:

Implemented --handle-pseudo-windows to show the complete window tree
Using --handle-pseudo-windows the file system now also contains pseudo
windows like window decorations. The parent relationship is visible in
the file system. An example script can print the window tree.
Documentation has been adjusted accordingly.

docs/xwmfs.asciidoc, after:

XWMFS(1)
========
:doctype: manpage


NAME
----
xwmfs - represents X11 window manager state in the file system


SYNOPSIS
--------
*xwmfs* ['OPTIONS'] 'MOUNTPOINT'


DESCRIPTION
-----------
An implementation of a userspace file system based on fuse that allows
interaction with an EWMH compliant X11 window manager via files.

Because the xwmfs acts as an X11 client on the X server it requires to have a
valid DISPLAY environment variable set and the authority to access the X11
display. Otherwise the xwmfs program will print an error and exit immediately.

To unmount the xwmfs file system the command `fusermount -u 'MOUNPOINT'` can
be used.

For information about the semantics of the file presented in the file system
see <<X1,*ENTRIES PER WINDOW*>> and <<X2,*ENTRIES FOR WINDOW MANAGER*>>.

OPTIONS
-------

*-f*::
	Run the file system in the foregrond. Otherwise the program will detach
	into the background.

*-d*::
	Enable additional low level debug output on stdout. This will trace
	every file system access and more.

*--logger*='EWID'::
	A bitmask for the logging output of the program. Each letter stands
	for error, warning, information and debug respectively. So a value of
	'1111' would enable all logging output to stdout. This logging
	consists of higher level information about what happens on X protocol
	and file system level. By default only errors and warnings are
	printed.

*--xsync*::
	Operates the X client library in synchronous mode. This allows better
	error detection if some X operation fails.

*--handle-pseudo-windows*::
	With this flag the file system also displays and updates windows that
	are not full windows in their own right, but popup menus or window
	decorations that are implemented as windows

[[X1]]
ENTRIES PER WINDOW
------------------

The `windows` directory contains one directory entry per X window managed by
the window manager on the current DISPLAY. Some secondary windows like popup
windows are currently not handled by xwmfs. Each directory is named after the
unique decimal window ID of the represented X window. These directories may
contain the following files:

*id*::
	A regular, read-only file that again produces the unique, decimal
	window ID of the represented X window.

*name*::
	A regular, read-write file that produces the current window title on
	read, and changes the window title on write. Changes of this value are
	also reported via the `events` file.

*desktop*::
	A regular, read-write file that produces the desktop number a window
	is located on on read, and changes where the desktop a window is
	located on write. Changes of this value are also reported via the
	`events` file.

*pid*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces the PID of the program that
	owns the window.

*command*::
	A regular, read-write file that allows to issue commands for the
	window. On read the list of possible commands is returned. On write
	the appropriate command is executed. Currently this covers 'DELETE'
	and 'DESTROY' to force or ask the window to be closed.

*events*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces one event per line that
	affects the represented X window. The name of the event corresponds to
	the name of the file that is affected by the event. For example, if
	the name of the window changes than an event named 'name' is produced.
	To obtain the new value you need to read the file in question. If the
	window gets closed then the events file produces a 'destroyed' event
	and returns an EOF indication on further read attempts.

*mapped*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces a boolean value of 0 or 1
	indicating whether this window is currently mapped (visible). Changes
	of this value are also reported via the `events` file.

[[X2]]
ENTRIES FOR WINDOW MANAGER
--------------------------

The `wm` directory contains global state related to the window manager. The
directory may contain the following files:


*name*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces the name of the running window
	manager.

*class*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces the kind of window manager
	that is running. Not always available.

*active_desktop*::
	A regular, read-write file that produces the number of the currently
	shown desktop on read. Writing a new desktop number to this file
	causes the active desktop to be changed.

*number_of_desktops*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces the number of virtual desktops
	currently configured.

*show_desktop_mode*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces a boolean value of 0 or 1
	indicating whether the "show desktop mode" is active.

*pid*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces the PID of the window manager
	process.

*events*::
	A regular, read-only file that produces one event per line that
	affects the global window manager state. The name of the event
	corresponds to the name of the file that is affected by the event. For
	example if the number of desktops changed then an event
	'number_of_desktops' is produced.

NOTES
-----

Depending on the window manager in use some features may not be available or
may behave differently than with other window managers. This has nothing to do
with xwmfs.

Because of the asynchronous nature of the X protocol, intermediate states may
be seen in the file system. A window might disappear at any time, values of
properties may change quickly. Any scripts that operate on the file system
should be prepared to deal with such situations.

Any open files that correspond to X windows that have already been destroyed
will return an error code of 'ENXIO' for any attempted operations.

EXIT STATUS
-----------
*0*::
    Success

*1*::
    Failure (syntax or usage error; X error).

ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
---------------------

*DISPLAY*::
  The X Display to use

AUTHOR
------
xwmfs was written by Matthias Gerstner <matthias.gerstner@nefkom.net>.


RESOURCES
---------
GitHub: <https://github.com/gerstner-hub/xwmfs>

COPYING
-------
Copyright \(C) 2017 Matthias Gerstner. Free use of this software is
granted under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL).
